Actually, everything that can be known has a Number; for it is impossible to grasp anything with the mind or to recognize it without this.
Philolaus
470 - 385 B.C.


researchers have found some amazing healthcare and biological applications for 3-D printing technology, called bioprinting. as a result, the 3-D printing market for healthcare is predicted to reach roughly 4.04 billion by 2018. From custom prosthetics to living tissue, 3-D printing is a versatile means of providing cost effective and individualized care to patients.

With the advent of 3-D bioprinting, cells can now be dispensed from the printer onto a biologically compatible scaffolding, layer by layer, to create a three dimensional viable tissue. Numerous tissues have been constructed that can be used for a number of clinical applications from transplants to scientific research.

Although 3-D bioprinting is still a relatively new technology, there is notable success within this field with greater implications as the technology develops. 
Five noteworthy advances that could revolutionize the healthcare industry:
blood vessels: one of the primary limitations to building artificial organs for implants has been the lack of vascularization (the ability to transport blood and other materials through blood vessels to individual cells) in order to maintain organ health. however, a Harvard team has a method for creating hollow channels that allow blood to flow throughout the organ, essentially functioning as blood vessels. the new development will allow researchers to build thicker, more complex tissues that would otherwise fail.

heart valve: physicians at the henry ford innovation institute have been using non-bio 3-D printing to recreate hearts and valves. while not actual replacement organs, the exact replicas of individual organs are invaluable for the optimal treatment of patients. as we all know, each of us have unique sets of fingerprints, but a lesser-known fact is that we all have different hearts and valves as well. the models generated by the 3-D printers allow the doctor to examine in detail the innermost workings of the heart without making a single incision. This means helping doctors determine a candidate's suitability for high risk procedures as well as optimal placement and custom fit of prosthetic valves and helping doctors anticipate adjustments that may be needed once the surgery begins.

skin: previously, a burn victim could be treated by spraying his own epethelial stem cells over the burn to help heal faster. now 3-D bioprinting offers treatment of deeper burns by emulating cells from multiple skin layers.

liver cells: Organovo, the developer of the first 3-D bioprinted liver tissue, has the potential to revolutionize medical research. By making live human liver tissue commercially available, researchers are now able to test the effectiveness and toxicity of medication prior to clinical trials without the possibility of damaging the liver of subjects. not only does this reduce the time and cost of research, the 3-D tissue also provides vital information to researchers that normal 2-D models would lack. "This gives researchers the kind of tool that they just haven't had in the past. They can't do the kind of experiments on a person that they can do with this tissue in a lab setting." said Michael Renard, executive vice president at Organovo.

 
Gene Mapping. that's the term i was looking for when it comes to the science of mapping a DNA sequence to an animal behavior.

circadian rhythm: any biological process that displays an endogenous (built-in, self-sustained), entrainable oscillation of about 24 hours. these 24-hour rhythms are driven by a circadian clock, and they have been widely observed in plants, animals, fungi, and cyanobacteria.

circadian comes from the latin circa, meaning "around" or "approximately", and dies, meaning "day". the formal study of biological temporal rhythms, such as daily, tidal, weekly, seasonal, and annual rythms , is called chronobiology.

in vitro - performing a given experiment in a controlled environment outside a living organism. an abiding weakness of in vitro experiments is that they fail to replicate the precise cellular conditions of an organism, particularly a microbe.

the lysates or extracts from culture-grown spirochetes do not reflect antigens expressed in the mammalian Borrelia. protein expression of culture-grown spirochetes does not fully resemble Borrelia in the host, i.e. the usefulness of protein lysates from culture-grown bacteria is limited as a source of antigen for ELISPOT analysis.
Until the last several years, efforts to detect and identify microorganisms in the human body have depended almost exclusively on in vitro studies. as a result, many researchers began to assume that chronic diseases were not caused by microbes. the net effect of all this was that the understanding of pathogens in disease was driven by the study of well-known, easy-to-culture microbes - which, as it turns out, represent the vast minority of bacteria in the human body.

in vivo - refers to experimentation using a whole, living organism as opposed to a partial or dead organism. Animal studies and clinical trials are two forms of in vivo research. in vivo testing is often employed over in vitro because it is better suited for observing the overall effects of an experiment on a living subject.

in silico - an expression used to mean "performed on computer or via computer simulation.":
 - bacterial sequencing techniques - as an alternative to in vitro methods for identifying bacteria,various in silico methods which sequence bacterial DNA and RNA have been developed. the most commonly used use is polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which takes a single or few copies of a piece of DNA and increases it across several orders of magnitude, generating millions or more copies of a particular DNA sequence. PCR has allowed researchers to detect bacteria associated with a variety of conditions with increasingly high sensitivity.
 - molecular modeling - used computer-based emulations to show that 25-D, one of the vitamin D metabolites, and Capnine, a substance produced by bacteria, turn off the Vitamin D Receptor. These conclusions have since been validated by clinical observations.
 - whole cell simulations - researchers have built a computer model of the crowded interior of a bacterial cell that - 


phospholipid: a class of lipids (fats,waxes) that are a major component of cell membranes. they can form lipid bilayers because of their amphiphilic characteristic. they would be necessary for the formation of the first cell. a bubble made with water will pop quickly but a bubble made of a wax or oily substance will be intact for longer. Also it might have formed around some fortuitous chemical compounds, keeping them sealed together inside an oily bubble for long enough that they might react with each other and form a protein which makes the vessel even stronger. they might absorb or merge with other similar protein-reinforced bubbles


